Adds "full eval" HOWTO. (#2111)
google/flax: docs/howtos/full_eval.rst

.. image:: https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg
   :target: https://colab.research.google.com/github/google/flax/blob/main/docs/notebooks/full_eval.ipynb

Processing the entire Dataset
=============================

For efficiency reasons, we form batches that contain multiple examples and
process them in parallel. Especially when evaluating a model, it is important
that we process all examples and **avoid losing the remainder** of examples that
does not form a complete batch at the end.

> The problem

Reviewer: It seems the problem is two-fold: double compilation (both in training and eval), and incorrect metric results (in eval). Is this correct? Maybe it is worth emphasizing this. Currently you state that is especially important during eval but you don't explain why.

Author: I see it more like this
1. In eval, we care about processing the full dataset because otherwise the metrics are off. (in training we usually do multiple epochs and using some examples 1x less for training does not matter)
2. When we want to avoid loosing data at the end, we run into other problems (like e.g. multiple compliations)

I think 1. is mentioned in the first paragraph "Especially when evaluating a model, it is important that we process all examples", and 2. is mentioned further down as disadvantage of some solutions.

  # 9728

Using multiple hosts further complicates the situation because JAX uses the SPMD
paradigm and every host must execute the same program. We would usually form
non-overlapping splits for different hosts with |tfds.split_for_jax_process()|_,
but this can lead to **different numbers for different hosts**, resulting in
different JAX programs when all examples are to be processed.

.. code-block:: python

  process_count = 6
  [
      len(tfds.load(dataset_name, split=tfds.split_for_jax_process(
          'test', process_index=process_index, process_count=process_count)))
      for process_index in range(process_count)
  ]
  # output:
  # [1667, 1667, 1667, 1667, 1666, 1666]

.. |tfds.split_for_jax_process()| replace:: ``tfds.split_for_jax_process()``
.. _tfds.split_for_jax_process(): https://www.tensorflow.org/datasets/api_docs/python/tfds/split_for_jax_process

The solution: padding
---------------------

Even though it's possible to solve this problem by cleverly adjusting the number
of batches executed by different devices on different hosts, such a solution
quickly becomes complicated and makes the main eval loop hard to read with a lot
of cumbersome logic.

> The more straight forward solution to this problem is to use padding at the end

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The more straightforward solution to this problem is to use padding at the end
```

Author: Done.

of the dataset to make sure that the last batch has the same size as the
preceding batches.

Manual implementation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The last batch is manually padded to contain the same number of examples as in
the preceding batches. The predictions for the padded examples are discarded
from the computation.

.. code-block:: python

  shard = lambda x: einops.rearrange(
      x, '(d b) ... -> d b ...', d=jax.local_device_count())
  unshard = lambda x: einops.rearrange(x, 'd b ... -> (d b) ...')

  correct = total = 0
  for batch in ds.as_numpy_iterator():
    images = batch['image']
    n = len(images)
    padding = np.zeros([per_host_batch_size - n, *images.shape[1:]], images.dtype)
    padded_images = np.concatenate([images, padding])

>     preds = unshard(get_preds(vs_p, shard(padded_images)))[:n]

Reviewer 2: Hey! What does `vs_p` mean / represent? Is it short for "variables_predict"? If it is, it took me a while to figure out, maybe a more descriptive name would help readers 😀

Author: I abbreviated `variables` with `vs`. Then often when I replicate things I use the `_p` suffix. But I'm not sure if that use is really widespread.

In either case, the `_p` is not needed here since it's an empty set, so I removed it, and replaced `vs` with the full `variables`.

Reviewer 2: > In either case, the _p is not needed here since it's an empty set, so I removed it, and replaced `vs` with the full `variables`.

I still see `vs_p` here, maybe I am wrong but is the intention is to rename it to `variables`?

.. code-block:: python

  sum(
      np.prod(batch['label'].shape)
      for batch in tfds.load('mnist', split='test')
          .batch(per_device_batch_size, drop_remainder=True)
          .batch(jax.local_device_count())
  )
  # output:
  # 9728

Using multiple hosts further complicates the situation because JAX uses the SPMD
paradigm and every host must execute the same program. We would usually form
non-overlapping splits for different hosts with |tfds.split_for_jax_process()|_,
but this can lead to **different numbers for different hosts**, resulting in
different JAX programs when all examples are to be processed.

.. code-block:: python

  process_count = 6
  [
      len(tfds.load(dataset_name, split=tfds.split_for_jax_process(
          'test', process_index=process_index, process_count=process_count)))
      for process_index in range(process_count)
  ]
  # output:
  # [1667, 1667, 1667, 1667, 1666, 1666]

.. |tfds.split_for_jax_process()| replace:: ``tfds.split_for_jax_process()``
.. _tfds.split_for_jax_process(): https://www.tensorflow.org/datasets/api_docs/python/tfds/split_for_jax_process

The solution: padding
---------------------

> Even though it's possible to solve this problem by cleverly adjusting the number

Reviewer 3: pmap is not guaranteed to work when hosts have different shapes potentially causing deadlocks so I don't think you can actually do this right now. Unless you remove the parallel primitives from the batch dependent program

Author: yes, this would only work in some cases - e.g. when you evaluate a model that does not have any parallel primitives inside, and then have custom code that calls psum etc when inside pmap, but not when jit-ted on single host ... making it even messier

I don't think it adds anything here to go into too many details since it's not the proposed solution though

Reviewer 3: Yeah I guess the easiest thing to say is: Just keep your batch size static unless you know what you are doing. I can agree with that

|clu.metrics|_.

In that case we would want to pass the metrics as a ``static_argnums`` (i.e. do
not shard/pad it), and treat the return value as ``static_return`` too (i.e. no
un-sharding or un-padding):

.. code-block:: python

  def eval_step(metrics, variables, batch):
    print('retrigger compilation', {k: v.shape for k, v in batch.items()})
    preds = model.apply(variables, batch['image'])
    correct = (batch['mask'] & (batch['label'] == preds.argmax(axis=-1))).sum()
    total = batch['mask'].sum()
    return dict(
        correct=metrics['correct'] + jax.lax.psum(correct, axis_name='batch'),
        total=metrics['total'] + jax.lax.psum(total, axis_name='batch'),
    )

  eval_step = jax.pmap(eval_step, axis_name='batch')
  eval_step = flax.jax_utils.pad_shard_unpad(
      eval_step, static_argnums=(0, 1), static_return=True)

.. |jax_metrics| replace:: ``clu.metrics``
.. _jax_metrics: https://github.com/cgarciae/jax_metrics

.. |clu.metrics| replace:: ``clu.metrics``
.. _clu.metrics: https://github.com/google/CommonLoopUtils/blob/main/clu/metrics.py

Adding "infinite padding"
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Above solution works in most cases, but it has some limitations:

Reviewer 3: another solution is to let each host process indepedently and do the pmean(metrics) add the very end in a seperate pmapped program

Author: yes, this is actually very similar to what I do with `count_correct_p()` below

note that the above two sections `Adding "infinite padding"` and `Computing metrics in eval_step()` can easily be combined

so I think the different usecases are covered with the subsections, but if you feel there is a specific combination that should be added, feel free to add some more specific comments and I'll write it up.

Reviewer 3: Ah indeed a parallel stoppinig criteria is not so different when you use padding. I was thinking more towards a note on what to do when you don't want to pad. You might not want to include that route for simplicity though

Author: but without padding different hosts would have different batch sizes? and this would also lead to re-compilations?

(in that case I think we should keep it simple with "solution=padding" since it seems superior, at the cost of a little more complicated code, but that added complication is quite small, especially in the case where one compute the metrics in the main eval loop)
